---
date: 2017-07-05 15:00:00 -0400
title: Valkyrie
layout: default
---

## Valkyrie ##

We've been working on [Plum](https://github.com/pulibrary/plum) for the last two years and have consistently
struggled with performance for both bulk loading and editing. We've fixed some of the problems, and [found
ways to mitigate some of the issues](https://github.com/samvera/hyrax/wiki/Plum-Performance-Tuning) by
disabling services and refactoring others. Our performance still isn't acceptable for production. When we
edit large books (500+ pages), the time to save grows linearly with the number of pages, climbing to a minute
or more for our largest books. Data migrations of a few hundred objects can take several hours. As a library,
we want a platform with robust, scalable support for books, especially large or complicated ones that can’t be
served by existing platforms. We have a number of books with more than 1000 pages, and book sets with dozens
of volumes, and we need to support their ingest, maintenance, access and preservation.

We are hopeful that the [Fedora API specification](http://fedora.info/spec/) and alternative implementations
(like [Cavendish](https://github.com/cavendish-ldp/cavendish),
[Trellis](https://github.com/trellis-ldp/trellis), and
[Derby](https://github.com/fcrepo4-labs/derby)) will help address these performance problems. These will
certainly take some time to mature, and none of the alternative implementations are ready to use today. Even
if any of these were available as an option now, the Samvera stack is complicated by reliance on two or three
persistence backends and keeping them synchronized.

We think there is a fundamental need to continuously improve our code and address our use cases in sustainable
ways. With this in mind, we’ve been working on something new, to meet our performance needs and address
complexity of the application stack for scale. As the community continues to grow and address emerging needs,
flexibility and sustainability are key issues to the success of our community, since one size does not always
fit all. Any changes in the core Samvera stack would need to give people more options and make it easier to
maintain.

This is why we've started work on [Valkyrie](https://github.com/samvera-labs/valkyrie), a framework for
introducing alternative persistence strategies into Samvera-based repositories. It began as an exercise to
clearly separate and define the persistence options used by Samvera. We found that performant backends open
up the possibility of creating a simpler repository application without the workarounds needed to avoid
problems with the existing Fedora implementation.

If Fedora is working for you, you can use Valkyrie with Fedora to have more control over your persistence
strategy, and less application logic baked in. If you want to try a different backend, like a PostgreSQL
database, Valkyrie lets you configure your application to use one to try it out. Valkyrie also lets you
combine multiple backends, so you could store your data in Fedora and PostgreSQL if that makes sense for your
application.

Please join us! We would love your help developing, testing, and documenting Valkyrie and experimenting with
different approaches for making Samvera more sustainable for the future. Coming up is a [Data Mapper Working
Group](https://wiki.duraspace.org/display/samvera/Samvera+Data+Mapper+Working+Group) sprint that you can join
to work on Valkyrie, and we're going to be participating and also working to port Plum to Valkyrie.
